0x05c basic information gathering (Static Analysis) (#1686)
OWASP/owasp-mstg: Document/0x05c-Reverse-Engineering-and-Tampering.md

###### Java and Kotlin Bytecode

As we already know, all the Java and Kotlin bytecode of an Android application is compiled into a DEX file. Each DEX file contains a [list of string identifiers](https://source.android.com/devices/tech/dalvik/dex-format#file-layout "string identifiers list") (strings_ids), which contains all the string identifiers used in the binary whenever a string is referred, including internal naming (e.g, type descriptors) or constant objects referred by the code (e.g hardcoded strings). You can simply dump this list using tools such as Ghidra (GUI based) or [Dextra](http://newandroidbook.com/tools/dextra.html "Dextra") (CLI based).

With Ghidra, strings can be obtained by simply loading the DEX file and selecting **Window -> Defined strings** in the menu.

> Loading an APK file directly into Ghidra might lead to inconsistencies. Thus it is recommended to extract the DEX file by unzipping the APK file and then loading it into Ghidra.

<img src="Images/Chapters/0x05c/ghidra_dex_strings.png" width="500px"/>

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

###### Native Code

In order to extract strings from native code used in an Android application, you can use GUI tools such as Ghidra or Cutter or rely on CLI-based tools such as the _strings_ Unix utility (`strings <path_to_binary>`) or radare2's rabin2 (`rabin2 -zz <path_to_binary>`). When using the CLI-based ones you can take advantage of other tools such as grep (e.g. in conjunction with regular expressions) to further filter and analyze the results. 

##### Cross References

###### Java and Kotlin

> Java cross references is supported by many tools, including Ghidra and [jadx](https://github.com/skylot/jadx "jadx"). With Ghidra cross references can be obtained by right clicking on the desired function in the symbol tree and selecting **Show References to**, as shown in the image below.
> 
> <img src="Images/Chapters/0x05c/Ghidra_java_xrefs.png" width="500px"/>
> 
> <img src="Images/Chapters/0x05c/jadx_java_xrefs.png" width="500px"/>

Reviewer: As these options are pretty basic I'd remove the pictures, for maintainability: if they ever change the names of the options it'd be easier to update just the text. I've also included a link to a gif from the official jadx Wiki showing this live.
```suggestion
There are many RE tools that support retrieving Java cross references. For many of the GUI-based ones, this is usually done by right clicking on the desired function and selecting the corresponding option, e.g. **Show References to** in Ghidra or [**Find Usage** in jadx](https://github.com/skylot/jadx/wiki/jadx-gui-features-overview#find-usage "jadx").
```

###### Native Code

Similarly to Java analysis, you can also use Ghidra to analyze native libraries and obtain cross references by right clicking the desired function and selecting **Show References to**.

> <img src="Images/Chapters/0x05c/ghidra_native_xrefs.png" width="500px"/>
> 

Reviewer: Same here, less to maintain :)
```suggestion
```

Similarly, the above approach can be used to determine where and how an application is using NFC. For instance, an application using Host-based Card Emulation for performing digital payments must use the `android.nfc` package. Therefore, a good stating point for NFC API analysis would be to consult the [Android Developer Documentation](https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/connectivity/nfc/hce "Host-based card emulation overview") to get some ideas and start searching for critical functions such as `processCommandApdu` from the `android.nfc.cardemulation.HostApduService` class. 

> ##### Checking Secure Connections

Reviewer: Maybe we can generalize and just call it like this. This way we remain more flexible. One thing to add (after this PR is merged) is something like #1707 (Domain enumeration).

For the things mentioned by Sven above (https://github.com/OWASP/owasp-mstg/pull/1686/files#r408075578) simply refer to "Basic Network Monitoring/Sniffing" in 0x05b. And for the actual test cases refer to 0x05g.

```suggestion
##### Network Communication
```

Android requires applications to use secure network connection, like HTTPS, while communicating with the backend server. When evaluating an application it is important to check the network configuration, as often debug environment (less secure) configurations are pushed into final release build by mistake.

> Also, many applications to further strengthen the network security, use Certificate Pinning. Certificate pinning not only deters MITM attacks, but also slows down reverse engineering of network traffic. But there are many pitfalls while implementing it correctly, one such common mistake being - not verifying a self-signed certificate used in certificate pinning.
> 
> Implementation of secure connections and verifying them can be an intricate process, and it is covered in more detail in "[Android Network APIs](0x05g-testing-network-communication "Android Network APIs")" section.

Reviewer: - Fixed close repetition of "cert. pinning"
- Not sure about this affirmation ", but also slows down reverse engineering of network traffic". How does this happen?

```suggestion
The implementation and verification of secure connections can be an intricate process and there are numerous aspects to consider. For instance, many applications use other protocols apart from HTTP such as XMPP or plain TCP packets, or perform certificate pinning in an attempt to deter MITM attacks but unfortunately having severe logical bugs in its implementation or an inherently wrong security network configuration.

Remember that in most of the cases, just using static analysis will not be enough and might even turn to be extremely inefficient when compared to the dynamic alternatives which will get much more reliable results (e.g. using an interceptor proxy). In this section we've just slightly touched the surface, please refer to the section "[Basic Network Monitoring/Sniffing](0x05b-Basic-Security_Testing.md#basic-network-monitoringsniffing "Basic Network Monitoring/Sniffing")" in the "Android Basic Security Testing" chapter and also check the test cases in the chapter "[Android Network APIs](0x05g-testing-network-communication "Android Network APIs")".
```

Author: Slowing down as one need to bypass/disable cert pinning and then only the traffic can be analyzed using burp suite or other proxy tools. Does that make sense?

During **black-box testing**, you won't have access to the original form of the source code. You'll usually have the application package in [Android's APK format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Android_application_package "Android application package"), which can be installed on an Android device or reverse engineered as explained in the section "Disassembling and Decompiling".

#### Basic Information Gathering

As discussed in previous sections, an Android application can consist of both Java bytecode and native code. To start with analysis of an application, each type of code may require different approach and tools. In this section, we will learn about some approaches and tools for collecting basic information about a given Android application using static analysis.

##### Retrieving Strings

While performing any kind of binary analysis, strings can be considered as one of the most valuable starting point. Strings provide a context to a part of the binary being analyzed. For example, an error log string like "Data encryption failed." gives us a hint that the adjoining code is responsible for performing some kind of encryption operation.

###### Java

> As we already know, all the Java bytecode of an Android application is compiled into a dex file. Each dex file contains a [string identifiers list](https://source.android.com/devices/tech/dalvik/dex-format#file-layout "string identifiers list") (strings_ids). Each string used in the code is given an identifier number, and internally this identifier number is used whenever a string is referred. This list contains all the string identifiers used in the binary, including internal naming (e.g, type descriptors) or constant objects referred by the code (e.g hard coded strings). Knowing this, we can simply dump this list to get all the strings used in the Java bytecode in a dex file. Fortunately, there are plenty of tools already available for dumping strings form Java bytecode and one can choose depending on the needs. In this section we will use Ghidra (GUI based), and [Dextra](http://newandroidbook.com/tools/dextra.html "Dextra") (CLI based).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As we already know, all the Java bytecode of an Android application is compiled into a dex file. Each dex file contains a [string identifiers list](https://source.android.com/devices/tech/dalvik/dex-format#file-layout "string identifiers list") (strings_ids). Each string used in the code is given an identifier number, and internally this identifier number is used whenever a string is referred. This list contains all the string identifiers used in the binary, including internal naming (e.g, type descriptors) or constant objects referred by the code (e.g hard coded strings). Knowing this, we can simply dump this list to get all the strings used in the Java bytecode that is part of the dex file. Fortunately, there are plenty of tools already available for dumping strings form Java bytecode and one can choose depending on the needs. In this section we will use Ghidra (GUI based), and [Dextra](http://newandroidbook.com/tools/dextra.html "Dextra") (CLI based).
```

Reviewer 2: Dextra seems to be 3 years old and I also couldn't find the download link. Is this tool still maintained and where are the sources of Dextra? Was the tool working reliable for you?

Author: Dextra is by Jonathan Levin, he do not release the source code of his tools.  the tool is good. Hard to say how actively it is maintained, but it still works for me and I use it quite often.

With Ghidra, strings can be obtained by simply loading the dex file into the tool and by selecting **Window -> Defined strings** in the menu.

> > Loading APK file directly to Ghidra is buggy, thus it is recommended to extract dex file by unzipping the APK file and using it in Ghidra.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Loading an APK file directly into Ghidra might lead to inconsistencies. Thus it is recommended to extract the dex file by unzipping the APK file and then loading it into Ghidra.
```

Or what else do you mean with "buggy". Is Ghidra crashing?

Author: It doesn't crash, its just not reliable. Your wording is better :)

<img src="Images/Chapters/0x05c/ghidra_dex_strings.png" width="500px"/>

Dextra is a CLI based tool, and provides multiple features to explore dex files. All the strings in a dex file can be dumped using Dextra using the following command:

```bash
dextra -S classes.dex
```

The output from Dextra can be manipulated using standard Linux commands, for example, using `grep` to search for certain keywords.

> It is important to know, the list of strings obtained using the above tools can be very big, as it also includes the various class and package names used in the application. Going through the complete list, specially for big binaries, can be very cumbersome. Thus, it is recommended to start with keyword based searching and go through the list only when keyword search does not work. Some keywords which can be a good starting point are - password, key, and secret.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is important to know, the list of strings obtained using the above tools can be very big, as it also includes the various class and package names used in the application. Going through the complete list, specially for big binaries, can be very cumbersome. Thus, it is recommended to start with keyword based searching and go through the list only when keyword search does not work. Some generic keywords which can be a good starting point are - password, key, and secret. Other useful keywords in context of the app can be explored while you are using the app. 
```

###### Native

> For extracting strings from the native code used in an Android application, we can either use Ghidra (GUI based) or `strings` utility command available on \*nix.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For extracting strings from the native code used in an Android application, we can either use Ghidra (GUI based) or the Unix utility `strings` (CLI).
```

> Use of Ghidra for extracting strings for a native binary has already been discussed in "[Using Disassemblers and Decompilers](0x04c-tampering-and-reverse-engineering#ghidra "Using Disassembler and Decompilers")" section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
How to use Ghidra for extracting strings for a native binary has already been discussed in the section "[Using Disassemblers and Decompilers](0x04c-tampering-and-reverse-engineering#ghidra "Using Disassembler and Decompilers")".
```

> `strings` is a CLI based tool and using it is straightforward, as demonstrated below for a native library:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`strings` is a CLI based tool and is pretty straightforward to use, as demonstrated below for a native library:
```

Reviewer 2: You could also add to pipe the output of the strings command into a text file (strings a.so > output.txt), so it's easier to go through the output with other unix tools, like grep, head etc.

Author: Updated the content.

```bash
strings libnative-lib.so
...
Java_sg_vantagepoint_helloworldjni_MainActivity_stringFromJNI
...
Hello from C++
...
```

##### Cross References

###### Java

> Java cross references is supported by many tools, including Ghidra and [jadx](https://github.com/skylot/jadx "jadx"). With Ghidra cross references can be obtained by right clicking on the desired function in the symbol tree and selecting **Show References to**, as shown in the image below.

Reviewer 2: Please put in a newline after the headings. Also in the next paragraphs

Author: Sorry on this one. I thought my linter took care of it. Fixed now.

<img src="Images/Chapters/0x05c/Ghidra_java_xrefs.png" width="500px"/>

Another popular Java decompiler tool is jadx. Using jadx, cross references for a desired function can be obtained by right clicking the decompiled function and selecting **Find Usage**.

<img src="Images/Chapters/0x05c/jadx_java_xrefs.png" width="500px"/>

###### Native
While analysing an Android application's native library using Ghidra, cross references can be obtained similarly to Java, i.e, by right clicking the desired function and selecting **Show References to**.

<img src="Images/Chapters/0x05c/ghidra_native_xrefs.png" width="500px"/>

##### API Usage

> Android platform provides many in-built libraries for frequently used functionalities in applications, example cryptography, Bluetooth, NFC, network or location libraries. Presence of these imported libraries in an application's code can give us valuable information about the nature of application being evaluated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Android platform provides many in-built libraries for frequently used functionalities in applications, for example cryptography, Bluetooth, NFC, network or location libraries. Presence of these imported libraries in an application's code can give us valuable information about the nature of application being evaluated.
```

> For instance, if in an application `javax.crypto.Cipher` class is imported, it indicates that application will be performing some kind of cryptographic operation. Fortunately, Cryptographic calls are very standard in nature, i.e, they need to be called in a particular order to work correctly, this knowledge can be helpful when analysing cryptography APIs. Example, by looking for `Cipher.getInstance()` function, we can determine the cryptographic algorithm being used. With such approach we can directly move to analysing cryptographic assets, which often are very critical in an application. Further information on how to analyse Android's cryptographic APIs is discussed in  "[Android Cryptographic APIs](0x05e-testing-cryptography "Android Cryptographic APIs")" section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For instance, if an application is importing `javax.crypto.Cipher`, it indicates that the application will be performing some kind of cryptographic operation. Fortunately, Cryptographic calls are very standard in nature, i.e, they need to be called in a particular order to work correctly, this knowledge can be helpful when analysing cryptography APIs. For example, by looking for the `Cipher.getInstance()` function, we can determine the cryptographic algorithm being used. With such an approach we can directly move to analysing cryptographic assets, which often are very critical in an application. Further information on how to analyse Android's cryptographic APIs is discussed in the section  "[Android Cryptographic APIs](0x05e-testing-cryptography "Android Cryptographic APIs")".
```

> Similarly, the above approach can be used in determining where and how an application is using NFC. For instance, an application using Host-based Card Emulation for performing digital payments, must use `android.nfc` package. By searching for critical functions like `processCommandApdu()` from `android.nfc.cardemulation.HostApduService` class, can provide us a starting point for NFC API analysis.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similarly, the above approach can be used in determining where and how an application is using NFC. For instance, an application using Host-based Card Emulation for performing digital payments, must use the `android.nfc` package. By searching for critical functions like `processCommandApdu()` from the `android.nfc.cardemulation.HostApduService` class, this information can provide us a starting point for NFC API analysis.
```

Checking for the imported classes in an application can help us in understanding the functionalities implemented. Further by determining the most important functions of an imported class, one can start analysis by assuming this function as the centrepiece of the puzzle.

> ##### Checking Secure Connections

Reviewer 2: I think this section can be removed. 
Or if we keep it we should make a note that you are getting much more reliable results when doing dynamic testing with Burp. Not all communication is via HTTP, but also plain tcp packets or XMPP. This can easily be observered in dynamic testing, which can be very tedious to identify in RE. 

@cpholguera What do you think?

Reviewer: Those are very good points @sushi2k , I'd keep the section as it's purpose is exactly that: to show what you can statically test regarding secure connections. If there's not so much you can test or there are better ways do do it, this is _the place_ to describe that.

I'd suggest @su-vikas can consider your comments above and enhance the section.

Also I'd think of a little checklist of what can/should be tested statically: e.g. trying to find out which protocols are being used, checking the network configuration files, pinned certs vs target domains, more ideas? so that one can ensure that at least everything that can be checked was checked and often this minimal info also helps ease (servers as input for) the dynamic analysis ;)

Reviewer 2: Agree!

> Android require applications to use secure network connection, like HTTPS, while communicating with the backend server. When evaluating an application it is important to check network configuration, as often debug environment (less secure) configurations are pushed into final release build by mistake.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Android requires applications to use secure network connection, like HTTPS, while communicating with the backend server. When evaluating an application it is important to check the network configuration, as often debug environment (less secure) configurations are pushed into final release build by mistake.
```

###### Native

For extracting strings from the native code used in an Android application, we can either use Ghidra (GUI based) or the Unix utility `strings` (CLI).

How to use Ghidra for extracting strings for a native binary has already been discussed in the section "[Using Disassemblers and Decompilers](0x04c-tampering-and-reverse-engineering#ghidra "Using Disassembler and Decompilers")".

`strings` is a CLI based tool and is pretty straightforward to use, as demonstrated below for a native library:

```bash
strings libnative-lib.so > output.txt
...
Java_sg_vantagepoint_helloworldjni_MainActivity_stringFromJNI
...
Hello from C++
...
```

The output can also be piped to a text file, and using other Unix utilities like `grep`, `head` etc for further analysis. 

##### Cross References

> ###### Java

Reviewer: ```suggestion
###### Java and Kotlin
```

> Java cross references is supported by many tools, including Ghidra and [jadx](https://github.com/skylot/jadx "jadx"). With Ghidra cross references can be obtained by right clicking on the desired function in the symbol tree and selecting **Show References to**, as shown in the image below.

Reviewer: I'd shorten this section like this and remove lines 349-350.
```suggestion
There are many RE tools that support retrieving Java cross references. For many of the GUI-based ones, this is usually done by right clicking on the desired function and selecting the corresponding option, e.g. **Show References to** in Ghidra or **Find Usage** in [jadx](https://github.com/skylot/jadx "jadx"). See the images below for some examples.
```

<img src="Images/Chapters/0x05c/Ghidra_java_xrefs.png" width="500px"/>

> 
> Another popular Java decompiler tool is jadx. Using jadx, cross references for a desired function can be obtained by right clicking the decompiled function and selecting **Find Usage**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

<img src="Images/Chapters/0x05c/jadx_java_xrefs.png" width="500px"/>

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ###### Native

Reviewer: ```suggestion
###### Native Code
```

> While analysing an Android application's native library using Ghidra, cross references can be obtained similarly to Java, i.e, by right clicking the desired function and selecting **Show References to**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly to Java analysis, you can also use Ghidra to analyze native libraries and obtain cross references by right clicking the desired function and selecting **Show References to**.
```

<img src="Images/Chapters/0x05c/ghidra_native_xrefs.png" width="500px"/>

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

##### API Usage

> The Android platform provides many in-built libraries for frequently used functionalities in applications, for example cryptography, Bluetooth, NFC, network or location libraries. Presence of these imported libraries in an application's code can give us valuable information about the nature of application being evaluated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Android platform provides many in-built libraries for frequently used functionalities in applications, for example cryptography, Bluetooth, NFC, network or location libraries. Determining the presence of these libraries in an application can give us valuable information about its nature.
```

> For instance, if an application is importing `javax.crypto.Cipher`, it indicates that the application will be performing some kind of cryptographic operation. Fortunately, Cryptographic calls are very standard in nature, i.e, they need to be called in a particular order to work correctly, this knowledge can be helpful when analysing cryptography APIs. For example, by looking for the `Cipher.getInstance()` function, we can determine the cryptographic algorithm being used. With such an approach we can directly move to analysing cryptographic assets, which often are very critical in an application. Further information on how to analyse Android's cryptographic APIs is discussed in the section  "[Android Cryptographic APIs](0x05e-testing-cryptography "Android Cryptographic APIs")".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, if an application is importing `javax.crypto.Cipher`, it indicates that the application will be performing some kind of cryptographic operation. Fortunately, cryptographic calls are very standard in nature, i.e, they need to be called in a particular order to work correctly, this knowledge can be helpful when analysing cryptography APIs. For example, by looking for the `Cipher.getInstance` function, we can determine the cryptographic algorithm being used. With such an approach we can directly move to analyzing cryptographic assets, which often are very critical in an application. Further information on how to analyse Android's cryptographic APIs is discussed in the section  "[Android Cryptographic APIs](0x05e-testing-cryptography "Android Cryptographic APIs")".
```

> Similarly, the above approach can be used in determining where and how an application is using NFC. For instance, an application using Host-based Card Emulation for performing digital payments, must use the `android.nfc` package. By searching for critical functions like `processCommandApdu()` from the `android.nfc.cardemulation.HostApduService` class, this information can provide us a starting point for NFC API analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, the above approach can be used in determining where and how an application is using NFC. For instance, an application using Host-based Card Emulation for performing digital payments must use the `android.nfc` package. By searching for critical functions like `processCommandApdu` from the `android.nfc.cardemulation.HostApduService` class, this information can provide us a starting point for NFC API analysis.
```

> Checking for the imported classes in an application can help us in understanding the functionalities implemented. Further by determining the most important functions of an imported class, one can start analysis by assuming this function as the centrepiece of the puzzle.
> 

Reviewer: I think it's already well explained with the intro and the examples. We don't really need a closing paragraph here.
```suggestion
```

##### Checking Secure Connections

Android requires applications to use secure network connection, like HTTPS, while communicating with the backend server. When evaluating an application it is important to check the network configuration, as often debug environment (less secure) configurations are pushed into final release build by mistake.

Also, many applications to further strengthen the network security, use Certificate Pinning. Certificate pinning not only deters MITM attacks, but also slows down reverse engineering of network traffic. But there are many pitfalls while implementing it correctly, one such common mistake being - not verifying a self-signed certificate used in certificate pinning.

Implementation of secure connections and verifying them can be an intricate process, and it is covered in more detail in "[Android Network APIs](0x05g-testing-network-communication "Android Network APIs")" section.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

##### Network Communication

Android requires applications to use secure network connection, like HTTPS, while communicating with the backend server. When evaluating an application it is important to check the network configuration, as often debug environment (less secure) configurations might be pushed into final release build by mistake.

The implementation and verification of secure connections can be an intricate process and there are numerous aspects to consider. For instance, many applications use other protocols apart from HTTP such as XMPP or plain TCP packets, or perform certificate pinning in an attempt to deter MITM attacks but unfortunately having severe logical bugs in its implementation or an inherently wrong security network configuration.

> Remember that in most of the cases, just using static analysis will not be enough and might even turn to be extremely inefficient when compared to the dynamic alternatives which will get much more reliable results (e.g. using an interceptor proxy). In this section we've just slightly touched the surface, please refer to the section "[Basic Network Monitoring/Sniffing](0x05b-Basic-Security_Testing.md#basic-network-monitoringsniffing "Basic Network Monitoring/Sniffing")" in the "Android Basic Security Testing" chapter and also check the test cases in the chapter "[Android Network APIs](0x05g-testing-network-communication "Android Network APIs")".

Reviewer: fixing link

```suggestion
Remember that in most of the cases, just using static analysis will not be enough and might even turn to be extremely inefficient when compared to the dynamic alternatives which will get much more reliable results (e.g. using an interceptor proxy). In this section we've just slightly touched the surface, please refer to the section "[Basic Network Monitoring/Sniffing](0x05b-Basic-Security_Testing.md#basic-network-monitoringsniffing "Basic Network Monitoring/Sniffing")" in the "Android Basic Security Testing" chapter and also check the test cases in the chapter "[Android Network APIs](0x05g-Testing-Network-Communication.md "Android Network APIs")".
```

- IDA Pro - <https://www.hex-rays.com/products/ida/>
- JAD Decompiler - <http://www.javadecompilers.com/jad>
- JD (Java Decompiler) - <http://jd.benow.ca/>

> - Jadx - <https://github.com/skylot/jadx>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- jadx - <https://github.com/skylot/jadx>
```
